Hey, welcome back. On today's episode — smoke from two wildfires has 100 Mile House and Sheridan Lake under a health warning, sheep are doing prescribed grazing work in a Cariboo greenbelt, and B.C.'s nurses' job action has escalated to special mediation. Plus, a Deep Dive on who's actually calling the shots when a crisis crosses every jurisdiction line at once. That and more, coming right up.
Welcome to Cariboo Signals, an AI-generated review of the latest tech news and ideas that impact our rural communities. It's Saturday, July 11th, 2026. Here in the Cariboo, on the traditional and unceded territories of the Secwépemc, Tŝilhqot'in, and Dakelh nations. Today's theme is Cariboo Local Affairs — I'm Casey.
And I'm Riley. Today we're staying close to home — councils, budgets, and who actually has a voice when things get complicated in towns like ours. Quick weather check — out at Horsefly Lake it's 11 degrees with partly cloudy skies, high of 21 expected, low of 10 tonight, with light rain showers tomorrow bringing about 2 millimetres of precipitation. Across the region: 100 Mile House sitting at 12 with overcast, Williams Lake at 12 and overcast, Quesnel at 11 and overcast, and out on the Chilcotin plateau, Riske Creek at 9, also under grey skies. Given the smoke we'll be talking about today, keep an eye on air quality if you're heading outdoors this weekend.
Let's get into what's actually happening around the region.
We're opening with sheep — actual sheep — doing fire mitigation work in the 108 Mile Ranch Greenbelt. A flock has been brought in to graze down invasive species and reduce fuel load in that area outside 100 Mile House. The 100 Mile Free Press reported on it this week, with photos of the animals working their way through brush that would otherwise need machinery or herbicide to clear.
Low-tech, low-cost, and it doesn't need a diesel budget line. That's the kind of fire mitigation a small district can actually afford year over year.
It's part of a broader pattern, too — this isn't the first time targeted grazing has shown up as a wildfire strategy in dry interior landscapes, but it's a genuinely practical fit for a place like 108 Mile Ranch, where there's grassland, invasive weed pressure, and limited crew capacity all at once. And it ties directly into what we're getting into in the Deep Dive, because while the sheep are working on prevention, the region is also dealing with fires that are already burning.
Go ahead and set that one up.
The Tribune reported that the Brunswick Creek and Ainslie Creek wildfires have pushed heavy smoke into the Cariboo, prompting a health warning out of Sheridan Lake, east of 100 Mile House. The advisory includes safety tips — staying indoors during peak smoke hours, running air filtration if you have it, watching for symptoms in vulnerable people. We'll come back to what that actually means for how emergency information reaches people out here.
Shifting into the closer-to-home stories — the B.C. Nurses' Union job action has escalated to the point where special mediators have now been appointed. Health care workers have been walking picket lines across the province, and provincial labour officials stepped in this week to try to move stalled negotiations forward.
Any word on what's actually stalling talks?
The Tribune's coverage doesn't spell out the specific sticking points — just that mediation is now underway, with special mediators brought in specifically because regular bargaining hit a wall. For a region like ours, any disruption at Cariboo Memorial or the smaller clinics has an outsized effect. There isn't a second hospital to lean on if staffing gets thin, and travel time to the next-nearest facility isn't a quick fix here the way it might be in the Lower Mainland.
Worth watching whether mediation actually produces movement or just buys time before the next round of job action.
Sticking with British Columbia for a moment — CFJC Today in Kamloops ran wire coverage this week of a British military report that a cargo ship came under attack off the coast of Yemen in the Red Sea. It's not a Cariboo story on its face, but it's exactly the kind of shipping disruption that eventually shows up as a price increase on goods that get trucked up the Cariboo Highway.
Global supply chains and rural grocery shelves are more connected than people think. Doesn't take much of a Red Sea disruption to nudge fuel and freight costs.
Also worth noting today — a handful of stories with a genuine rural angle even though they're not Cariboo-specific. SpaceX has filed to launch up to 100,000 more Starlink satellites, promising as much as 100 times the current bandwidth. For communities still waiting on fiber buildout, that's a meaningful number.
ZDNet notes not everyone's thrilled about it, though — astronomers and orbital debris researchers are raising concerns about satellite density crowding low-earth orbit. More bandwidth for rural internet, more headaches for the people who study the night sky. It's a tradeoff nobody in the Cariboo gets a vote on, even though we'd be some of the beneficiaries.
Meta also walked back its AI image-generation feature for Instagram, called Muse Image, after a privacy backlash — people didn't love the idea of the app generating images involving them without clear consent, and Al Jazeera reported the company pulled it fairly quickly once the criticism built.
Shocking that people didn't want that.
CNET also reported the U.S. is weighing whether to drop the steering wheel requirement for driverless vehicles entirely — mostly framed as a regulatory win for companies like Tesla that are already building wheel-free models.
That's a policy question for cities with sidewalks and stoplights, mostly. Doesn't move the needle much for a gravel road outside Horsefly, but it's the kind of federal decision that eventually filters down to what gets tested here first, for better or worse, once the technology matures.
Engadget also had Volkswagen announcing it's dramatically shrinking its model lineup and factory footprint, following reports that as many as 100,000 jobs are under threat at the automaker. Big auto restructuring stories like that ripple into resource and manufacturing towns eventually, even ones as far removed as the Cariboo, through parts supply chains and dealership networks.
One more worth flagging — the FCC granted approval this week for a sun-reflecting space mirror project that's been widely criticized by astronomers. Reflect Orbital wants to use a network of satellites to direct sunlight at ground targets at night. It sounds like science fiction, but it's a live regulatory decision with real implications for anyone who cares about dark skies, which includes a fair number of people out here.
Given how much this region leans on stargazing tourism and just plain quiet night skies, that's one worth keeping an eye on.
A lighter one to close the roundup — Boing Boing had a piece on coffee machines built with zero plastic in the brew path, all glass and stainless steel construction. Small thing, but it fits the durability-over-convenience trend we've talked about on this show before.
Before we move to the spotlight, a quick note from the production side. Yesterday's episode ran short because of some budget controls on our end — that's since been resolved, and today's episode is back to full length. Thanks to the listener who flagged it for us; that kind of catch is exactly why we read every email that comes in.
With that squared away, let's get into today's community spotlight.
Today we're highlighting Central Cariboo Search and Rescue — a team of highly trained volunteers who respond when things go wrong across the central Cariboo, whether that's a lost hiker near Horsefly, a stranded snowmobiler on the plateau, or backup support during a regional emergency. They train year-round, they're on call regardless of weather or hour, and none of it comes with a paycheque. You can learn more or support their work at ccsar-dot-c-a.
Volunteer search and rescue is one of those things that quietly holds this whole region together, and it barely ever gets the credit it deserves.
Which is actually a pretty good bridge into today's Deep Dive — because when something goes wrong here, it's rarely one single authority making the call.
Let's start with what's actually happening right now. Heavy smoke from the Brunswick Creek and Ainslie Creek fires has triggered a health warning covering Sheridan Lake and 100 Mile House. The question worth asking is: when that warning goes out, whose decision was it, exactly?
BC Wildfire Service tracks the fires and issues perimeter updates. The regional health authority issues the air quality advisory. The municipality or regional district pushes it out locally, if they push it out at all. Three different bodies, three different mandates, one smoke cloud sitting over Sheridan Lake.
Right, and none of those three actually answers to 100 Mile House's council. If the messaging is slow, or contradictory, or just doesn't reach people without reliable cell service out past Sheridan Lake, there's no single desk you can bang on about it. That's the structural problem — not that any one agency is doing a bad job, but that nobody owns the whole chain.
That's not entirely fair, though. The Cariboo Regional District does run a local emergency operations structure — that's the layer that's supposed to translate provincial and health authority information into door-knocking, reception centres, evacuation alerts, the stuff that actually reaches a household. It's not glamorous, but it exists, and it's staffed by people who live here.
Staffed with what capacity, though? A regional district covering an area the size of some small provinces, with population centres this spread out, does not have a communications team that can localize a fast-moving smoke advisory for every hamlet in real time. The Tribune's own coverage is doing more granular reporting — naming Sheridan Lake specifically — than most of the official channels manage on a given day.
Fair point about capacity, but that's also an argument for why local media and volunteer networks end up doing real emergency communication work, whether or not that was ever the design. Central Cariboo Search and Rescue isn't just reactive rescue — during past fire seasons, SAR volunteers and community Facebook groups have functioned as the actual last-mile information network when official alerts lagged behind the smoke itself.
Which is great until you remember those are volunteers. Unpaid, uncontracted, no service-level agreement with the regional district. If the volunteer group is what's actually closing the information gap, that's not resilience — that's a government relying on free labour to cover its own communication failure.
It can be resilience AND a failure of design at the same time — those aren't mutually exclusive categories. Compare it to how some Ontario wildfire response networks restructured after their bad 2023 season: they didn't just add another provincial hotline, they built formal data-sharing agreements that piped real-time fire perimeter data directly into municipal and First Nations emergency channels, cutting the translation lag from hours down to something closer to real time.
Has anything like that actually been proposed here, or are we just admiring Ontario's homework from a distance?
Nothing formal that's been publicly reported locally, no. But the CRD's emergency alert subscription system has been expanding over the last couple of years, which is at least a step toward that kind of direct pipeline instead of relying on word-of-mouth and Facebook posts.
An opt-in subscription system still assumes you have cell coverage, you know it exists, and you signed up before the smoke started rolling in. That's a lot of ifs for somebody living out past Horsefly or up toward the Chilcotin plateau, where connectivity is spotty on a good day.
Which is exactly the design problem worth naming, instead of just calling it a funding problem. This isn't "the CRD needs a bigger emergency budget" — it's "the alert architecture assumes a kind of connectivity and civic engagement that a scattered rural population doesn't actually have." Different diagnosis, different fix.
Go on, then. What's the fix that isn't just "more money," since you clearly have one loaded up.
Some rural counties in the western U.S. have moved toward mesh-radio-based alert relays — physical repeater networks that don't depend on cell towers or ongoing subscriptions, tied into volunteer fire departments and search and rescue teams as the human nodes who maintain and monitor them. It's built once, it's community-owned, and it doesn't need a renewed grant application every two years to keep functioning. The hardware is cheap enough now that a regional district could fund it as a one-time capital project rather than an ongoing service line item that competes for budget every year.
That's a genuinely different structure than what we usually land on in these conversations — the whole point being it doesn't need to be re-funded every budget cycle once it's actually built. The gap I'd still want answered is who trains people on it and keeps the equipment maintained when the original grant-writer or champion moves on to something else. Infrastructure without a clear ownership structure just becomes the next thing nobody's responsible for in five years, sitting in a shed somewhere.
Which points back to organizations like Central Cariboo Search and Rescue, honestly — they already have the training pipeline, the on-call culture, and the local trust built up over years. Building the maintenance responsibility into an existing volunteer institution, instead of standing up a brand-new one from scratch, solves a good chunk of that ownership problem before it starts.
It solves the "who maintains it" question. It doesn't solve the "who pays for the initial hardware" question, and regional districts don't have a lot of slack capital lying around for a project that isn't legally required of them.
No, but it's a smaller ask than most infrastructure spending — repeater hardware is a fraction of the cost of, say, a new fire hall. It's the kind of thing a regional district could actually pursue through a provincial emergency preparedness grant without needing years of lead time.
Let's pull the lens out a bit, though, because smoke season isn't the only test of local voice happening in the Cariboo right now. Quesnel just dug up a time capsule from behind the Safeway — sat there almost forty years. Small story, but it says something about how communities decide what's worth preserving and who gets to decide that.
It's a nice one. Whoever buried that capsule back in the eighties made a bet about what would matter to Quesnel decades later — and the fact that a grocery chain even kept that promise across ownership changes and store renovations is its own small act of institutional memory that nobody had to legislate.
It also underlines how little formal process exists for that kind of civic memory-keeping. Nobody on Quesnel council today necessarily knew that capsule was even there. It survived because of luck and a maintenance crew who didn't demolish the wrong wall — not because there's a registry anywhere of what the town buried and where.
Sure, but I'd push back on calling that a governance failure. Some things are supposed to stay informal — a time capsule is meant to be a surprise decades later, not a tracked municipal asset with a maintenance schedule. The bigger local-voice question this week is really Horsefly and the Arts on the Fly festival, because that one does run through actual permitting and regional decision-making, not luck.
How so?
Arts on the Fly sets its stage right on the banks of the Horsefly River — an important salmon-spawning site — and runs a solar-powered outdoor venue that pulls people in from across the whole region and beyond. That doesn't happen without land use sign-off, likely some kind of environmental consideration given the salmon habitat nearby, and volunteer coordination on a scale most small towns don't manage more than once a year.
And Horsefly doesn't have its own municipal government — it's an unincorporated community inside the Cariboo Regional District. So whatever approvals that festival needs go through the CRD's electoral area process, not a local council that residents can walk into and lobby directly the way they might in Williams Lake or Quesnel.
Which is actually the more interesting version of the smoke-alert question we started with. In 100 Mile House, there's at least a district council you can show up to and speak at during public comment. In Horsefly, civic voice runs entirely through a regional district electoral area representative and volunteer festival organizers who've essentially built their own informal permitting relationship with the CRD over years of doing this event.
That's an arrangement I'd want tested, not assumed to be working. It's held together for Arts on the Fly because the organizers have built trust and know which doors to knock on. That's person-dependent capacity again — the same problem we flagged with the veterans' crosswalk a few weeks back. If the people who know the process step away, does the next volunteer committee know how to navigate it, or are they starting from zero with a river full of spawning salmon and no institutional memory of how the last approval went?
It is person-dependent right now, I'll grant that. But it's a solvable design problem too — the CRD could formalize what an unincorporated community event needs to submit and by when, publish it once as a standard checklist, and stop making every festival organizer reinvent the relationship from scratch every summer. That's not a funding ask. That's a document a regional planner could produce in an afternoon.
A checklist a regional district publishes because a podcast suggested it. I'd bet on the sheep story getting more traction, honestly.
Ha — fair. But it's a genuinely small ask, and small asks are exactly the kind of thing that gets ignored precisely because nobody bothers to write them down and submit them formally. Any electoral area director could put that together, and it would outlive whichever volunteer happens to be running the festival committee this particular year.
Which loops back to the smoke, actually — the underlying question in both cases isn't "who has jurisdiction." It's whether the institutions that do have jurisdiction are building anything durable, or whether they're quietly relying on the fact that volunteers and organizers will keep filling the gap without anyone having to formalize it.
And the honest answer is: some of both, depending on which desk you're looking at. The CRD's alert subscription expansion is real, if incomplete. The mesh-radio model exists elsewhere and hasn't been tried here yet, as far as anything public shows. Central Cariboo Search and Rescue's institutional continuity is real and could be leaned on more deliberately instead of accidentally, the way it currently is.
I'll agree the search-and-rescue route is the more promising one of those three, because it doesn't require a new grant cycle or a new agency — it uses trust and training that already exist and are already funded, even modestly. What it needs is the regional district actually naming that relationship formally in an emergency plan, instead of it just happening informally every fire season because SAR volunteers show up anyway.
Which is worth raising directly with a regional district director if you're in one of these unincorporated areas — ask whether there's a formal information-sharing agreement between the CRD emergency program and local volunteer search and rescue, or whether it's still ad hoc. That's a concrete, answerable question for a fall public meeting, and it's the kind of question that actually gets a yes-or-no answer instead of a vague policy response.
It's also worth asking the nurses' union situation through the same lens, honestly — special mediators got appointed this week, but nobody locally is tracking whether that process actually protects staffing levels at Cariboo Memorial specifically versus somewhere in the Lower Mainland. Provincial bargaining outcomes land differently depending on whether you've got a backup hospital an hour away or not.
That's a fair extension of the same pattern — provincial-level processes that don't have a mechanism for surfacing what they mean specifically for a town of ten thousand people versus a city of a million. The Cariboo doesn't get a formal seat in that mediation room, but the outcome still lands here first if a shift goes unstaffed.
Which is really the throughline across all of it today — sheep grazing crews, smoke advisories, festival permits, hospital staffing. None of these are questions of whether the Cariboo has capable people. It clearly does. It's whether the structures connecting local knowledge to the decisions that affect it are built deliberately, or whether they're held together by volunteers and habit.
And where I'd push back slightly is that "built deliberately" doesn't have to mean a brand-new bureaucracy. Sometimes it just means writing down the informal thing that already works — naming the SAR relationship, publishing the festival checklist — so it survives past the people currently doing it from memory.
I can live with that as a starting point, as long as it's an actual document somewhere and not another line in a strategic plan nobody reads.
If you've got a story about how your part of the Cariboo handled this smoke event — or didn't hear about it at all until the sky turned orange — that's exactly the kind of thing worth sending our way.
Feedback, corrections, or story tips — feedback at cariboo signals dot c-a. We read all of it.
Stay smoke-safe out there, check on your neighbours, and hope you're having a great weekend.
See you next time.